That's a minute machine.
It's the smallest.
And you know what?
The fidelity is just wonderful, too.
It is indeed.
I'll just start.
This must be quite amazing for you, this reaction.
It is most surprising.
Because these folks did come out in the States to...
You don't mind if I just put this a little closer to you that way?
To a very widespread and virtually universal indifference.
As Goldsmith said, the public makes an absolute point of neglecting my works.
That applied to these.
And then suddenly, even before Richard Snow's very, very favorable work,
review in the New York Times.
Even before that, it began to change once Norton started publishing, because Harcourt Price and Lippincott had had a go, and we just didn't know.
Lippincott was a very, very kind man.
There was a dear man called Brendan Gill.
No, no, it wasn't.
What was his name?
I dedicated one of the books to him, a dear man, and he encouraged me very heartily
For they could not make a commercial success at all.
They had very good reviews sometimes, very good.
But now people... Now you're talking about in the States?
I'm talking the States, yes.
But your popularity, I guess, in the UK... It was not inconsiderable.
It was not inconsiderable.
But it was nothing.
Well, I mean, after all, there are roughly 50 million people there, and I think you have.
How many people do you have?
About 260 million here, I guess.
Yes.
Yes, an awful lot more.
And they make their voices felt in no uncertain way.
Once they start, and then there's that snowball effect.
It always works.
Well, I've been writing about books, as I said, for close to 20 years.
I've never seen anything quite like this, because there are certainly
followings for individual workers, but you seem to cut across currents.
I mean, just look at this, we have physicians here.
Yes, I mean top men, top physicists, and that's harder still.
It's amazing.
And men and women.
Women, particularly.
Yes, I should say most of the people who write, an awful lot of people who write, they have to be sieved off by their publishers, otherwise
I'm a very slow, poor letter writer.
If I do half a dozen letters in the morning, well, that's my morning gone.
Even if I use formulae, which I don't like, Dr. Gord letters.
There it is.
Did you conceive of these when you started?
These are not amusements.
I mean, these are, and I think that's important to point out.
These, as John Bailey said, these are emphatically not adventure stories.
They are concerned with the condition humane.
And they are, it's relations between them, and the whole of it is intensified by them being shut up in a wooden box, set off to sea for months, years, with all the perils of war, of the elements, which are not inconsiderable in a sailing ship, shortage of food, shortage of water, overcrowding, disease.
The whole thing is in a sort of hothouse,
from the point of view of the development of human relations.
And that I find very propitious for speaking about these matters, Judy, which is what I'm essentially interested in.
The rest is the vehicle in which they come, and I make it as pleasant as ever I can, and I enjoy the vehicle.
But the essence of the matter is a
Is this your primary concern, this exploration of the relationship?
Yes, of course it is.
Of course the ocean is... Just as it was with Proust.
Exactly.
And the Proust omitted the funds.
Let me preface this next statement.
I spent three years at sea as a naval officer.
Oh, did you?
I'm an aircraft carrier.
Yes, you know what you're talking about.
You know, an aircraft carrier may be a huge ship, but it's still a very small community.
Exactly so, and you see one another every day, and you cannot get away from one another.
I remember one of the quotations we had was at Johnson.
They said, going to sea is a lot like going to prison, except that going to sea, you have the added danger of drowning.
I think it was quite like that.
There was fact, but he did say that going to prison usually gave you...
Better company and better food and better company.
But he wasn't too keen about that.
No, indeed he wasn't.
About the fellowship of the sea, shall we say.
That's all.
You know, of course, you've written some wonderful biographies.
I read the Joseph of the Banks book with great pleasure, and coincidentally, Morton is publishing now a biography of Cook.
Yes, yes.
Which is quite wonderful.
Yes.
Very fine man, indeed.
Did you see...
writing the biographies, uh, writing history, like you did Picasso as well, as your primary work, as your, as your primary concern?
No, they were.
Do you more or less gravitate into this, uh?
No, they, they, they were on the side.
Great fun.
I like, I like doing them very much.
And the banks, of course, sewed up all this, all this, all, all rematch or anything, and encapsulated it.
Of course, there you'll see it.
Uh,
rather set out in one book.
It's true, you have to extrapolate to make the full tale, but it does connect with these books, remarkably well.
In one of the books, I don't recall which, but you mentioned that you are creating some hypothetical years, and I wonder if you could just expand a little bit on that concept for me.
Yes.
Well,
I don't like to be absolutely fixed to chronological exactitude, but I do want a degree of chronological credibility.
And Homer didn't give a damn.
He carried on the Sea of Troy really beyond all the possibilities.
In the last ten years, I think.
I mean, the logistics of the Sea of Troy as described by him just, you know, it can't be accepted.
The Napoleonic was sufficiently close to us.
My wife, for example, wears the Nile Medal.
I mean, it's within three or four generations.
At home I was talking of something very, very much earlier, and about which an enormous amount of legend had already accumulated.
But I have to be a bit more accurate than that.
A bit.
I'm not tied to it.
So I have dragged things on, rather.
However, I am now within an easily close
The awful, as Storr puts it, outbreak of peace.
Ah.
Do you have anxiety about this?
Not really, but various people have said, Jack Aubrey has been on the post-captain's list for a long while.
He must be very known.
A flag list.
Now, that's not really quite true.
In point of fact, I was worried by...
a critic who said that, and a critic no less than a professor of English literature at Oxford, John Bailey.
Now, he had got it wrong.
I worked that out very carefully, and the general rate, the average rate of being a post-captain was 25 years before the flag.
Now, he was made post-captain only in, what, 1802, thereabouts.
So, as far as that's concerned, I've got a lot of leeway.
But there is this whole point of flag rank, which is very important to him, as it is to any sailor.
And there is... There are the confines of historical credibility.
So I don't think that in this particular war I can go on for much more than a volume of two.
Really?
No.
I'm on 18 now, and I'm blockading West, whereas Wellington's army's advance in France now.
However, I have a domestic situation here in this present book, which I think will tie up this present book, that I may come to a climax of this particular aspect of his career in the next, and then I have plans, if I'm spared, for another couple,
I do particularly want to go to the 20 or perhaps 21 times.
Well, this is 17, I believe.
Yes, 18 is on the way.
And 18 is in the works.
You certainly see it as a corpus.
Oh, quite certainly, yes.
And we can pick these up.
I think one of the beauties of the whole series or the cycle is that you can pick them up at any point, but it really does whet the appetite.
But also, if you want a context, you mentioned Proust earlier.
I mean...
We talk about many novels, but one whole, I think.
Yes, yes.
And you can pick up almost any, you've got Hedda Shigelmalt, for example.
Exactly.
And so it goes, and it is an entity.
There's a greater advantage in reading the entirety, but you can go, having read one after, you can go back and pick up the whole.
Now, with 17, 18 in the works, and you say perhaps you see the end, I guess,
I see the end for this particular war, but I have notions for a continuation beyond.
With the characters?
Oh, of course.
They're changing for you all the time, aren't they?
Oh, quite certainly.
They're mature, I'm mature, they're mature.
Exactly.
I had a... We're talking about... It's amazing when you have two or three questions at the same time.
You've been described quite flatteringly as people see qualities of Jane Austen and Forster in you.
How do you respond to comparisons like that?
Well, I'm extremely pleased at being compared with Jane Austen, whom I love deeply.
She's very, very good, and she gets better the more you read her, I find.
For sure, not much more by one way or another.
I mean, the comparison doesn't really matter at all.
You seem to enjoy the comparisons with writers of an earlier age.
I've seen you in print described as a man who might enjoy living in the 18th or 19th century.
Yes, but for the lack of brains and anesthesia and decent dentistry, I should refer to it as it is.
I'm quite happy where I am.
And, of course, the attraction of sailing as opposed to powered... And there is always a gift, isn't there?
In every one of these books, you certainly can give us a sense of the sea.
I think that's essential.
Oh, yes.
Now, I'm wondering now, this is... I don't know, I forgot to check how many pages.
We're under 300 pages, but it's amazing how...
much territory you cover.
We have the slave trade, we have the French, of course, as always, the domestic situations.
Do you plot these things very carefully?
No, pretty well.
Not very carefully, but a general line.
And very often, as with mites, if something comes to me while I'm reflecting at night, and it really seems to me a useful piece, or fun,
I'll interrupt my plot or put an intercalated piece, you see.
I understand over the weekend you were on a nuclear submarine?
Yes, Hampton she was called.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Do you remember which ship it was?
The Hampton?
Yes.
That was the name of the boat?
Hampton?
Hampton, yes.
I was there and I know very well what she was called Hampton, which I very kindly gave her a hat.
Oh, that's nice.
I hope there's gold braid on it.
Certainly, a great deal of gold braid.
That's, of course, in the Navy, everything about commander has gold braid.
And they made my wife an honorary submariner with a beautiful little insignia.
Dolphins?
Dolphins, that's it.
And she had given it to Mrs. Clinton immediately before.
It was Admiral Emory down there.
When you make these, I understand that when you make these trips, you always like to tie in a little bit of field work, I guess, a little bit of, on a previous trip you went to the Bronx Zoo.
Yes.
You visited old Irish Sides up in Boston, which they're doing a splendid job with that.
Oh, dear.
Splendid.
That was quite a nice night with the fog coming.
In fact, I wrote a piece of it.
It was such a perfect night with the fog.
It just reminded me of all these mornings when we went out to sea.
You've always had this attraction for the sea.
Oh, yes.
Are you one who can feel comfortable?
These gentlemen are returning from, I guess, it's a four-year mission, a four-year in this particular installment they've been circumnavigating for.
for some time.
Where it first starts, yes, where that kind of goes.
Yes.
Yes, that was an awful long time.
I've been a little careful not to give it exact bounds in the calendar, but it's an awful long time.
It's about that, yeah.
I don't want to pick up too much time, by the way, so tell me when we're... I really did want to get to meet you and get a couple of quotes, and I know how busy you're.
your time is.
You did say that you have a grand design for the series of novels.
Is there a grand design in your view?
Yes.
Well, the wheel comes from the whole... It is interesting also that
And this is one of the more clever technical skills that you bring to the task, is even though we know the outcome, we the reader, from this remove of a hundred and... There's not much suspense about the war, as well.
But for us, but there certainly is this... When you get caught up into the novel, you've managed to just inject this right degree of uncertainty, I guess, and...
When you had the characters also, did you, from the beginning, did you foresee a series of continuing characters?
Oh, yes.
Oh, quite certainly.
If you'll remember, the very first ends with the court-martial of Jack Aubrey for the loss of the sofa.
He's acquitted.
I mean, he was taken by a French squadron, after all, of the 74th.
He had no... And he's acquitted.
And as will... Come on, and...
the court model hands back his sword and hopes it will be used with equal success and courage on future occasions.
Well, I mean, that's a clear example, but the next book begins with his doing so.
And so, they're all open-ended.
You've been described by one reviewer, I don't recall which one, but one reviewer has described you as the best historical, I mean,
That's a categorical statement.
Have you seen that?
That's Richard Snow.
The best historical novel ever written.
He's a man who's pretty much given to understatement, but I don't really resent it.
But I'm just wondering, in your view, what is incumbent upon the historical novelist?
I hate to use the word mission,
Insofar as he has a mission, which is, yes, I must admit, a forbidden word, he has to write about that which transcends the merely temporal, but in a different time of some different value.
What are these shocking things, do you think, these people?
These firefighters.
But they have revolvers, I suppose.
They're probably campus security.
I mean, I had to go through a battery of things to get in here.
Well, let's go back to historical knowledge.
Here's to describe man in his intemporal aspect.
In a given time, with different mornings round him, with a culture that has
on a similar basis but with different emphases and this is to do in a language that is convincing for the period of which he is writing but he is essentially to speak about what are human beings and there is an eternal humanity
from about the very earliest records known to men.
The cave paintings that I have to know, they were painted by people one would have spoken to with real understanding.
One knows exactly what that wise and what that wild boy is doing.
There was an immediate fellowship, so there is, with the two men in the Iliad.
the two soldiers on the walls of Troy who see Helen go by, and they say roughly, well, it's worth it, it's worth it, worth it.
They might have said that afterwards.
They were saying, Brigitte Bardot, a man in the room.
One feels an immediate contact.
You mentioned the concern of what are human beings, and of course, again, we set these stories in the early 1800s.
Do you feel that human nature is a constant?
There are constants in it.
And there are a lot of variables round about that nucleus.
So it seems to be... One suffers very much with Lizzie Bennet when her relatives behave in a vulgar manner.
I'm talking, of course, of Brian Bridgetus.
And that's the constant.
Their manner of behaving vulgar.
various from from time to time what is considered vulgar whether you must change up your knife and fork i mean what the hell but for some for a generation or so it matters but the embarrassment remains in this constant but when you are writing when you're creating and characterizing these these characters are they late 20th century people
There are people in that period.
So you have to enter that period yourself.
Oh, quite certainly.
And you do.
Oh, well, well, well, well, well.
And you're very comfortable there.
Perfectly.
I know the language.
I know the architecture.
I live in an ancient civilization with an architecture that hasn't changed in my childhood.
It hasn't changed at all.
In a countryside, it hasn't changed much, above all in Ireland and in my part of Catalonia.
No, I'm really quite determined.
And as a Catholic, using its own very recent Latin language.
It's not classical Latin, but it's an ecclesiastical lesson.
It hasn't changed 1,500 years.
You see, you can slide back to that with precious little trouble.
Now, you write, I think you said you write in the morning.
Yes.
You write, I'm sure, by longhand.
Of course.
None of this word processing business.
How is his handwriting, sir?
Very legible.
Do you do many drafts?
Are there many variants?
No.
I write a set of notes for the entirety.
I write closer notes when I'm sitting out on each chapter.
And then, so that I shall forget all these notes, I tune them sometimes to the wall.
Sometimes they vanish in a heap of papers.
My filing system isn't quite what it might be.
But then I write away.
I write in a good day, a very good day, a couple of thousand words.
Then when I finish my chapter, I type it as far as my typing ability allows me.
Editing as I go.
I left off stage.
I reread the manuscript.
Then type there.
Then I edit the manuscript.
Then I show it to my wife, who, when we've agreed on balance,
differences.
She then types it pretty.
That's interesting.
So your wife is kind of an editorial woman?
Oh, very much.
Oh, dear Lord, yes.
She's a very important part of the process.
In terms of reading critically what you write, or does she also give input?
I hate that word, too, but make suggestions.
Input, I guess, is the word.
No.
Are there ever any serendipitous turns for you, or is it pretty firmly structured once you're underway?
Yes.
You see, I'm so accustomed to my own rhythm that's... So it goes, it's... Pretty well.
Unless I've been vexed, unless people write to me, unless visitors come, or blight strikes, or a vineyard, or that sort of thing.
But I mean, what I'm saying, I guess, is that you never encounter any surprises in the narrative along the way.
Well, yes, occasionally.
What I like to think of as a brilliant thought will occur to me.
And that goes in.
Sometimes it makes me very happy.
Sometimes it comes to me in the night.
Very often.
And I write it the next morning.
And just one quick question and I'm going to let you go because I think my half hour is about up.
Who do you read for pleasure?
You've mentioned... Well, you see, I write an awful lot.
I've got a great many other things to do.
You have to keep abreast reading a decent paper like Le Monde.
And reading Le Monde is the best part of an hour.
I do like to listen to music.
I have a fairly active social life.
So I just don't read very much new stuff unless I'm reviewing it, unless it's a friend's book.
I generally go back to my own very particular friends.
At the moment I'm reading critical, solidly through Chaucer, but at Ard Mount.
I know him very well, Closier.
It's easy going.
Jane Austen I look into very frequently.
I'm reading War and Peace at the moment for this journal.
Oh dear, it is so.
Yes, I don't read Russian reads.
They did, were moderate at one time, but I don't, you know.
Every French I thought, at least, I write in French.
And the Mongol translation of Tolstoy is very, very good.
Most of the English translations are painful to degree.
But Tolstoy, naughty so-called.
Dear he so-called.
So much better than I can remember it.
That's a great line.
Oh, dear.
And when you consider, my...
That's all my things, perhaps, sometimes, occasionally, or twice.
Countess Tolstoy quoted out War and Peace eight diatoms.
Wow.
Isn't that right?
And, of course, there were no diatoms.
War and Peace, no less.
And they were harrowing furiously all the time.
That's probably why he took off on that.
I'm going to, I think I'm going to wrap it up, sir.
I wonder if you'd be kind enough to inscribe a happy... Okay, sir, well.
But my chapter is just about exactly 10 minutes.
Really?
Really close.
So you have an internal clock.
We basically feel that's it.
And I think my internal clock tells me my time is that.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, sir.
It was a great pleasure, and I look forward to the next opportunity.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.